Yeah.
Right. So
If, uh, we can give you a few minutes
for introductory remarks, minister,
and then, um, we'll open up to committee questions.
Thanks for taking the time to join us.
Sounds great. Well,
good morning everybody, and thank you Mr.
Chair and committee members for the opportunity
to speak with you all today.
I will briefly update you on the progress work Safe has made
in delivering the government's health
and safety reform priorities during 20 24, 25.
And then take your questions As part of a broader suite
of health and safety reforms,
the government is refocusing work safe from an enforcement
agency to one that engages early to support businesses
and individuals to manage their critical risks.
These reforms are essential to creating safer workplaces
and ensuring regulation is proportionate,
practical, and consistent.
WorkSafe has undertaken a significant strategic reset.
The organization is embedding a risk-based enforcement
model, refreshing sector specific guidance,
and improving permitting.
Systems Enforcement is shifting from reactive
compliance to proportionate educated engagement.
Guidance for high harm industries has been refreshed,
outdated, materials removed,
and new tools piloted to improve accessibility.
These give businesses greater certainty about
what is reasonably practicable
and supports the shift
to a more proportionate educative regulator.
WorkSafe trajectory is positive.
Operationally, backlogs
and permitting applications have been significantly reduced.
And Inspectorate capability uplift is underway
through new training and performance frameworks.
In the past year,
WorkSafe completed over 13,000 assessments,
a 8.3% increase on the previous year, reflecting its intent
to be more visible and proactive,
particularly in high harm sectors and financially.
WorkSafe has built strong reserves that can be used
to support a multi-year strategic work program,
ensuring reform delivery without creating
ongoing baseline pressure.
I have recently strengthened the governance
of the organization by appointing a new chair
and two new board members.
These appointments follow an earlier refresh
of board skills in 2024.
The current board understands what is required
to support the government's reforms
and strengthen work safes role as a proportionate
and practical regulator.
In summary, WorkSafe is making tangible progress
with strong governance, clear strategy,
and a commitment to proportionate and practical regulation.
I'm confident WorkSafe is well positioned
to deliver the outcomes we expect
and support safer workplaces across
New Zealand in the coming years.
And I'm very happy to take your questions.
Thanks, minister. Um, the first question is from Lawrence.
Uh, thank you Chair. I just have, um, couple of questions
for the minister on the thing
that minister mentions right in the end.
First of all, thank you for coming, minister, um, in terms
of the board, uh,
and you mentioned that you have appointed three new members
of the board, including the new chair.
Mm-hmm. But it is also apparent
that there are now no longer worker
representation on that board.
Is that a concern for the minister?
Well, I think that's a, a misinterpretation of the board
and the appointments to it.
We do have a worker representative. His name is, uh, Mr.
Alderson, uh, who is a chartered accountant.
He has been the Chief executive
of Construction Health and Safety New Zealand.
Uh, he's also been a director of Nate's in construction, uh,
and has also done work with unions.
Uh, so he brings, I think, a really important perspective
for the worker perspective, the board, uh, being
that we heard through the road roadshow, uh, from a lot
of small businesses
and, uh, people who are workers in small businesses, uh,
that they don't feel like they have the support
that they need, uh,
that a large business might have workers in a
large business might have.
Um, and so we also know
that construction is a very high harm area and industry.
So I think having someone with practical skills, the reality
of what it's like to be a worker on a construction site
is very valuable for the board.
Can I just check, Dan, follow up question.
Um, so from what I'm sounding, is there anyone there, Dan,
on that board from a union background or from Yeah,
I haven't specifically asked them that.
Okay. Um, you could ask them that yourself. Okay.
But that's not been one of the things
that I've requested people disclose.
Sure. Um, just final question on this.
Did any of the outgoing, um, board members ask to stay on?
Is it a process that you've undertaken?
I don't believe it would be appropriate to disclose
that sort of information, given that, uh, the board process
and appointments is,
there's only a small number of people on it.
Um, and I believe that would be personal information
that I'm not able to disclose.
Uh, there's a sub from Palm Sheet
Supplementary. Uh,
minister you mentioned about the construction industry
and construction industry, as we know,
is a high risk industry.
And you also mentioned small businesses.
So, uh, it, from your statement,
it looks like you've done some work in that space.
Can you tell us what has happened?
Yeah, so, uh, when we did the, uh, reforms, uh,
and as well as, uh, WorkSafe having a strategic reset, uh,
we thought it was very important to focus on critical risk,
um, and making sure that that's, uh, defined within the law.
That definition is, uh, still coming.
Uh, 'cause that's still sitting with PCO, uh,
but also making sure that we are
identifying those very high harm
or high hazard, uh, industries, uh,
and working with them, uh, to identify what those risks are
to help people upskill to get guidance much earlier.
Um, and within the construction sector, uh,
WorkSafe will be working with, uh, the construction sector,
uh, to develop what's called an approved code of practice,
um, as well as working on, um, other guidance
for things like a scaffolding.
Uh, I think this is really important
because we know that we have a, a large number
of small businesses in New Zealand, uh,
who don't have the same resources as some larger companies.
Uh, but we also know that too many people are dying, uh,
within agriculture, forestry and construction.
Thank you,
Jan. Oh, thank
you, minister.
Just a follow ups, um, on Lawrence's question,
very limited worker representation there on the board,
but just wondering is WorkSafe has a, a commitment
to underserved communities.
Uh, what's the makeup of the board to do, uh,
with Maori Pacific, those underserved communities?
Anybody on there that is, has that lived to knowledge?
Uh, look, I haven't specifically asked people for, uh,
outlining their ethnicity
or how they might identify themselves.
I've looked at what skills that they would bring
to the board, and I think that's more important, uh,
when it comes to us identifying areas of high harm
and what we can do to actually reduce, uh, deaths, uh,
across the country.
I would note, um,
that over the last few years there has been a significant
reduction, uh, in deaths, especially in the,
uh, Maori populace.
Uh, if she'll give me time, I'll attempt to find, I
Don't need that now. 'cause we'll
probably go into that with WorkSafe themselves.
Okay. Yeah. Uh, Vanessa,
Uh, thank you Minister.
I wonder if you could, um,
just help me understand a little bit about that, um,
critical risk definition.
Um, you said that there's work coming, I understand that.
Is, um, is it likely that that might reflect what, um,
say board members have been on risk committees might
understand in terms of that kind of matrix of, um,
likelihood and the severity of the, the, the harm
that's, um, occurs?
Is that the kind of thing that we might be looking at?
Yeah. So one of the things that we wanted to ensure, uh,
was happening across the health
and safety, uh, part of any workplace was
that people are focusing on identifying and managing
or eliminating actions that could cause death,
where it's not possible to eliminate them, to manage
that risk, uh, to manage serious injury and serious illness.
Now, as part of that, our, um, PCO drafters are working
through how we will specifically define that in law.
And so I can't, uh, give the committee any specificity
until we actually see that drafting come back, uh,
for the first reading.
Um, but one of the intentions here is that
where there have been specific regulations
that identify very specific risks that must be managed
for critical risk, for example, in mining.
And, but those things still stand as part of that regulation
and definition of critical risk.
Okay. Um,
And then we've got, Lawrence, you had a stop one,
one sec just on, on the board structure again,
and I hear what the minister is saying in terms of,
those are not specific things that you are looking for,
but one of the key things when it comes
to board is it's relatability to the everyday workers.
'cause you know, they are the ones who are most at risk
when it comes to health and safety.
How then do you ensure that if those kind
of things like lived experience
or again, you know, I don't know, um, the person
specifically, and we can ask later,
but the everyday worker generally don't consider a chief
executive or a director of a company
as a relatable person in terms
of everyday working experience.
So what reassurance do you have to ensure
that the board is relatable to the people?
What a strange question.
Uh, but look, boards
and they're not supposed to seem relatable.
They're supposed to provide due diligence and governance
and strategic oversight to a chief executive
and to an organization.
Most people have never encountered board members, uh,
in any normal circumstance.
Um, they are there
to set the strategic oversight for the organization.
I can give you absolute faith though, given that I've met,
uh, Chris Alderson, uh,
that he is an outstanding individual.
Um, he seems exceedingly highly respected, uh,
within his, uh, group.
Um, and the feedback that I've had, uh, online
and in person is that he'll be very welcomed, uh,
into the role, uh,
because of his great work, uh, trying
to uphold high safety standards within the construction
industry, uh, because of his desire, uh,
to not see people harmed at work.
Um, I just suggest to the member that Perha potentially,
if they have a concern, they should attempt to meet, uh, Mr.
Alderson. Uh, but second to that, the chair
of the committee I think will bring great
gravitas to the role as well.
Uh, because aside from construction, we know that one
of the highest harm areas that we have is agriculture.
Um, and, uh, thank you for that.
And I think it is really important
that we are bringing someone who is the sheer of the role
as someone who has great skill and governance experience.
He understands the role of being a director on a board, uh,
but also has, uh, has experienced, uh,
having managed his own farming business as well
as having expertise in high risk industries, uh,
like being chair of the Mars and Maritime Holdings.
Uh, so, you know, he's been in the primary sector
and the port sector as well as having a, a range of, uh,
governance experience that he'll bring to the board.
And I think that more than anything is
what we should be looking for for boards.
Uh, they're not necessarily there
to have individual interactions
to just form a out of representation. Right.
Representation. Um,
grad question
That she just asked. Oh,
the question was about the fact that she's got, um, um,
experience in the farming sector being a farmer
and small businessman himself.
So that was, thank you for filing.
Shannon, would you like to ask your question?
Oh, no, it's just sort of, um, a follow up to
that was surely you would, um, believe that a board has
to represent the communities of which it represents, whether
that be employers or workers, or,
I believe the role of the board is to set, set
Cultural Strategic oversight
and to do a good job in governance and due diligence
and the responsibilities under the law.
Um, it's not my view
that we should be appointing people just
because they are a specific ethnicity.
A specific No, I gender or specific age.
Those are your words. It's based on competence.
Um, I've got a cultural
Competence to be a role of a governor.
He wants to ask the question. Just
a final set then on this.
Is there anything in the act that requires the board
to be representative of the community?
Uh, not of the community.
Um, we will move on to the primary from Jan.
Thank you. And thank you minister for, um,
mentioning the changes that you have introduced, uh,
talking about, you are talking about, um, that they will
reduce death and serious injury,
but that's not what the advice that came
through from officials said to you.
WorkSafe, portioned, uh, you and,
and said that an internal review found no evidence
that the changes would actually reduce injuries or deaths.
So what evidence are you basing your, um,
hypothesis on that it will,
and are you concerned about that advice coming through
and rethinking where you might be going?
Uh, no, I'm not rethinking where I'm going.
Look, I think in part it is always very difficult to predict
what would happen, uh, when you're dealing with a, a system
where there is a lot of accident that it can occur.
You have individual actions rather than just, you know,
a, a government action.
Um, and you also have to ensure that if the law changes, uh,
that people are actually going to enforce
and go along with the law.
So you, you have a lot
that you can't necessarily try and predict.
But to give you a bit of, uh, confidence of
where we are heading, um,
because when we were out on the road show,
what we heard was very different, uh, to some of the advice
that came through from officials, which is
that there are a large number of people in our community
that feel uncertain
and unconfident of how to keep their staff safe,
uh, and know what they need to be doing to comply with the,
with the law and to keep their workers safe.
Um, and I was very, um, heartened to see that site safe,
uh, which is an organization representing the, uh,
construction sector with over 6,000 member businesses
and training 78,000 learners in health and safety.
Um, did a survey in response to the direction of travel
of these reforms and found that 85% of them
agreed there needs to be more focus on critical risks.
95% respondents agree
that there should be clearer guidance available.
Uh, 95% agree that there should be more use
of approved codes of practices,
and 79% agree there should be a clearer distinction
between the roles of management and governance.
And so that very strongly aligns with
what I was hearing out in the community.
Now, we don't have access
to survey data from every industry,
but it is very heartening to see that's what's coming out
of one of our mo our most high risk industries,
that they are looking for more guidance, uh,
and they're looking for that clearer
definition of critical risk.
I'm please, you've brought that up, minister,
because we've got business New Zealand unions
and safety, um, experts that have signed letters to you
to say that that is absolutely correct,
but it's not the broad guidance that they're looking for
because as WorkSafe themselves of caution, that having
that rather than regulation could create loopholes
for people there.
And companies that are engaged in unsafe practices,
what they've been calling out
for is the secondary legislation through regulation.
And there needs to be a mixture of both.
And what we have not got in this country is
that secondary legislation regulations,
why have you gone down that track
that could create loopholes as the people
that are the experts in this have cautioned you would
happen, um, rather than, than putting in
that broad guidance, why have you not gone down that track
of putting regulations in?
But I don't think that's a fair summary of the view.
Uh, it's true that I have received letters from the Council
of Trade Union as well as Business New Zealand,
who were asking for the law to remain relatively unchanged.
Uh, and you'll see that I did take up that feedback.
So for large, uh, industry
and large businesses, uh, most
of what's happening now will still happen into the future.
Uh, where we have made some changes is
to define more strongly the priority of critical risk.
Uh, and said that for small businesses who are dealing
with a lot more stress, uh,
because they don't have the same hr, uh,
and, uh, resourcing as a large business, uh,
that will make sure that they're
specifically focusing on critical risk rather than all the
other stuff that could come with a larger
company with more resource.
Uh, but I would also suggest that it's not the case
that an approved code of practice is not welcome.
Um, I would also suggest that that was one
of the recommendations of the Pike River Inquiry.
Absolutely. Last one with regulations.
Why is the, is the approved code of practice,
uh, relevant in law?
Is it a legal binding document in law as a reg as opposed
to a regulation, which is,
Uh, excuse me, we will be looking at, uh, more use
of approved codes of practices to give those businesses more
security of what it is that they do need to comply.
We are not removing regulation.
We are simply saying that for those areas
of, I'm sorry, what was that? I
Said, you can't, if it's not there,
you can't remove it if regulations not
there and not existent.
And did the previous government actually
Do that? That No, I know Jan.
I'm not answer no.
Well, she's just asking, but can we let her finish? Yeah.
I'll give you a last up and then we're gonna move
on quite open. It's
My fault that the previous government didn't
do enough on health and safety.
I'm quite open about the fact that we didn't get
as far in regulations as we wanted to.
What I'm asking you is why didn't you carry that work on?
Okay, last comment.
We're actually doing a lot more work in this space
for health and safety to give guidance
and clarity than than the previous governments did.
Um, but it's really important that regulation
doesn't fall outside of technological change.
We know that when regulations come through,
they take a long time, they can get out of date very fast,
which is why we have moved towards approved
codes of practices.
'cause if you look at, um, for example,
even in the forestry sector, uh, the approved code
of practice that was, uh,
signed about 10 years ago became out of date
with new technology.
So we have signed this year a new approved code of practice,
which didn't then, uh, need to go all the way
through a regulative reg regulation change.
Okay. Yeah.
Minister with the guidance approach, uh, that would mean
that there is, uh, there will be need
for more frontline people, uh, like inspectors.
Uh, can you tell us if, uh, you are hearing that
and if something has happened
In that space?
Yeah, absolutely. Look, one of the things that I've heard
a lot across, um, business
and workers is this belief that, uh,
WorkSafe has been underfunded
because they haven't seen that frontline resource,
uh, in the community.
Uh, while we have seen, um, the number
of staff within WorkSafe decrease over the last few years,
the number of inspectors and frontline roles is increasing.
And I believe we are on track to have the highest number
of inspectors ever.
But Sharon, you might wish to speak to that. Yeah,
That's absolutely true.
Um, and I can run through some numbers a bit later on,
but yes, we have, um, over 200 speakers,
another 40 in training
and another 20 coming on. So that would be the highest
We've had. That's great.
Um, Lawrence to up and then we'll go into primary.
Thank you. Um, I mean,
just wanna check in terms of what you said.
So what you are saying is that instead of regulations,
you've got guidelines and code of practice.
But I think the main thing that I'm looking
for here is accountability.
So regulations has a legal binding sort of ability,
and if work site does come in
and they violate regulations, there are some consequences
for people for violating the regulations.
Would you be able to say that accountability to the code
of practice and guidance is as stringent
as it would be for regulation?
Well, I think what is really important here is that
Yes or no, We are actually focusing on the high hazard
areas and working with them to determine what it is
that should be good practice.
And it's going to take us a long time
and clearly was what the previous government would've found,
as well, would take a long time to do nothing in terms
of creating new regulations versus working with industry
to set those standards as approved codes of practice.
So what you'll be seeing under this government is more work
to define what would be good practice than we have seen in
the previous six years.
I agree. Lawrence, go, go to your poem. Okay.
Because otherwise we're gonna run outta
Time. Yep. Thanks Chair.
Um, fi um, minister,
can you actually talk us through your appointment process
for ERA for the employment relations authority
and how do you manage conflict of interest?
So, Mr. Chair, would that be out
of scope given us a WorkSafe? Yeah.
Um, appropriation it would be question. Okay. And
We can go with another one. You need to tie
Into the, um, in your review as well.
Um, so in terms
of from a WorkSafe, now just checking,
is employment of limit for the purpose of this review?
Just seeking your guidance? It
Would. I, so, so this would
need to be about work health
and safety WorkSafe, uh, the annual review
or strategic intentions since, um, the end
of the annual period.
Okay, cool.
Um, if you don't have one, we'll go to Jane.
Yeah, we'll go to chat. Um, minister,
do you have a target ratio of number of inspectors?
Uh, WorkSafe inspectors?
Uh, thank you for the question.
It's, it's really interesting.
Uh, we don't have a specific target
that we are working towards.
I do know that WorkSafe, uh, would like to, um, come up
to the same sort of, uh, ratio as we have in Australia.
However, I do understand it has been quite a difficulty
in trying to understand, uh, the different definitions
of inspectors, uh,
because of the different ways the countries actually, um,
put them into different categories.
But I would also note the International Labor Organization,
uh, no longer recommends, uh,
any country move towards ratio figures for
what we should be attempting to achieve, um,
because of the difference between those different countries
and jurisdictions and the requirements. Enough primary,
Um, up on that, and then I'm gonna round off, no.
Okay. Okay. Minister, thank you so much
for taking the time to join us this morning.
Um, again, apologies for the late start. Um, thank you.
And now we'll have, um, Sharon
and your team go straight into the hearing.
Just before we do that, can you just check your final
Thank you.
We just pause the recording
business.
Um, what we would like to do is give you, um,
the opportunity to give opening remarks, um,
and then we'll, we'll go to questions.
We've got a structured agenda.
We tend to follow the headings of the, um, agenda as we move
through, um,
but we're not too tied to it as we, as we Yes.
Thank you, Koto.
I'm Murray Jagger, the new chairperson of WorkSafe, uh,
and, uh, with me today as Chief Executive Sharon Thompson.
And to her right is Kelly Hanson, white acting Deputy.
See insights and engagement.
Um, I was appointed as chairperson five weeks ago,
and so the year in review was primarily Sharon
and her team to speak to.
Um, after my introduction, my first impressions
as chair five weeks ago, uh, my first impressions at,
at the over the past year has been one
of in insightful transformation
and pur purposeful progress of WorkSafe.
The organization significantly improved its financial
position, and 73% of businesses identified health
and safety improvements due to their interactions with us
in a period of organizational change
and evolving expectations.
WorkSafe focus remained on ensuring
that New Zealand is a healthy
and safe at work that required a shared commitment
from business workers, industry organizations,
and government agencies.
WorkSafe, uh, plays a central role in supporting,
influencing and partnering across the system.
On the 31st of March this year,
WorkSafe implemented a new organizational structure,
a key milestone to align, uh, our organizational structure.
With our strategy to increasingly become a more trusted
creditable and responsive regulator,
we have strengthened inspectorate capability,
refreshed guidance, and prioritized engagement in our high
risk sectors of agriculture, forestry,
construction, and manufacturing.
These changes are designed to make WorkSafe more modern,
practical and proportionate lifting business awareness
and confidence in managing health
and safety risks while reducing unnecessary compliance
costs for business.
Our work program aligns with the government's health
and safety, uh, reforms.
Uh, we are becoming a regulator
that focuses on managing critical risks, provides clear
and consistent guidance,
and helps businesses do
what is reasonably practical without overdoing it.
And when standards aren't met, we still step in with firm
and fair enforcement.
Looking at the two things that really matter for New Zealand
and New Zealanders, allow me to highlight two key facts.
New Zealand's work fatality rate has halved over the past 20
years, and serious injury rates have also dropped
by a third in that time.
These hard won gains matter
because they mean more people get home safely each day.
The achievement is significant,
although there is plenty more to do.
Looking ahead, WorkSafe will continue to focus on
where harm's greatest, build strong partnerships,
and regulate a proportionate and practical way.
We are committed to evolving into a regulator
that is modern, proactive and consistent,
and one that makes a real difference to the health
and safety of New Zealand as a work.
Thank you for the opportunity
to share these opening remarks,
and we are happy to take committee questions.
Thank you, Murray. Our first question
From Jan. Thank
you. And thank you for that.
Um, appreciate you coming in for this, this hearing.
And our first topic that we are looking at is the overview
of WorkSafe and the strategic priorities.
Um, it kind of goes into performance measurements.
It's hard to sort of look at the two separately,
although I've got questions in that area too.
Oh, good. But, um, I'm,
I'm looking at the new performance measures that, you know,
has been part of the evolvement over the last year,
and it seems that they're really distancing themselves from
the reduction of harm targets.
It's quite a different approach.
Can you assure me that the reduction
of harm targets are still a big part of this?
'cause I can't see that in the work.
So yeah, so the reduction
of harm targets are system targets
that were set some time ago,
but absolutely, we still report them.
They're our annual report.
The ones that you'll see as our performance measures are the
ones that we are in control of as WorkSafe,
and they, they tie back to our outcome measures framework.
So you'll see in there we've got some system,
we've got some, uh, industry business workers
and energy safety of course.
So, uh, yes, we are definitely still keeping an eye on,
you know, fatalities and the system measures serious harm.
However, that's not a measure
that we own completely on our own.
Right. It's all I want.
Thank you. Um, thanks chair.
I've got a few questions regarding, so in, on page 20
of your report in terms of one of your priorities is workers
with greater need, um,
and you've listed a number of, um,
things you have done for that.
I want to check a couple of questions. Mm-hmm.
The first one being, when you deliver these
multicultural workshops or come home safety
or safely workshops, how
do you bring on people from a migrant background
or migrant workers or vulnerable migrant workers?
How are they being asked to come to these sort of workshops?
So the workshops are available to any business,
and, um, they approach us based on, you know, what their,
their needs of their work workforce.
And then we tailor our, our response to that workshop.
So if you have a business, then who has issues
with providing health
and safety standards for the migrant workers
or exploiting the migrant workers, then they're gonna come
to you for those kind of workshops.
So how are you then reaching out
to those vulnerable workers?
You know, we're looking at are people who are on es,
you know, people who are tied into a
particular accredited employer.
Yeah. So how are you ensuring their safety?
So we have specific guidance
and educational tools for s in particular Uhhuh,
but also our Inspectorate
and increasingly so are,
are recruited on a multicultural basis.
We actually, um, specify in our recruitment that being able
to speak a second language is an advantage.
So our, our deployment is through our Inspectorate,
and we try and, you know, match our inspector
to the communities, and then we do specific work,
like Portfo is working particularly
with Pacific communities,
but those tools are all available online. Yeah.
And I guess the, just to, to answer
to your question specifically,
you are right when a business isn't going to come to us
because, you know, we, that's what our targeted, um, visit,
you know, to going into those high harm,
high harm areas of manufacturing.
We would be visiting those businesses so that we're able
to kind of offer, you know, see the issues
and offer the, um, the solutions.
So if that's something that you're doing, which is great,
and I I'm also really appreciative that you've identified
that this being an, an issue for you to kind
of continue working on.
Mm-hmm. Um, what then, uh, if, uh,
if you go into a, a business
and then there are issues, what are some of the expectations
around them to turn things around?
So the inspectors have a whole range of tools
that they can kind of use.
Obviously, they can, um, provide information and,
and give guidance if the,
the main issue is a lack of knowledge.
Um, or they can issue notices or warnings or,
or any number of kind of range of, um, responses based on
what, what's the right thing to get the
right, right behavior change.
Just one final sub chair, um, also I'm looking at, uh,
what welcome, by the way, congratulations.
Um, one of the things
that you mentioned right at the beginning in terms
of the work related fatalities and non-fatal injuries
and the number has decreased.
I know we talked a lot about, you know, high, uh,
risk industries about forestry, agriculture
and manufacturing, et cetera.
Um, do you also break that data
or are you able to give com the committee a
more in depth data breakdown of both their
ethnic background, but as well
as their potential if possible?
Um, visa staff?
Um, I think the answer is no.
The data is just not granular enough for us
to be able to do that.
So I think there was a note in the annual report too.
So, no, that's very difficult to do accurately.
How would you, oh, sorry. Sorry.
How would you then achieve the kind
of outcomes if those data aren't being collected in
that granular way?
How would you then identify the issue if a particular sector
or particular community
or particular, you know,
temporary visa holders are more at risk?
So we tend to work through industry associations, um, to,
to get that reach.
And it goes to a point that you made before too.
You know, people often won't come to work safe directly
for their training and probably know,
nor should they be, provide generic information online.
And we, you know, provide guidance.
But actually industry associations are their trusted allies
and our trusted allies.
So we use them as intermediaries in our business
to have the reach to know
the business, to know the audience.
So they're a really important part of our strategy refresh
as making sure that we expand our reach and our,
and amplify what we are doing
through those industry associations.
Okay. Um, Jan, thank you.
Um, so delivering your strategic priorities,
and you've outlined that as being reducing harmed workers,
number one, right?
So you talk about the different sorts of harms,
and this is more of a, a very niche
and, um, question, well, not niche,
but actually a specific topic you put there on page 12
about chronic harm.
And you've used the, um, the example
of engineered stone in focus.
And one of your, uh,
Ways that you are
Supposed to be working and responsibilities is
to give advice around, um, reducing
that harm at work.
And you've outlined there
what you've done in the engineered stone and focus.
What I noticed when I read that was
that it talks very much about putting, um, you know,
different ways of dealing with hazardous stone in place.
But in Australia, when the national task force
did their investigations, they found that anything
that you've mentioned there, um,
there was still silica dust exposure persisted despite the
new policies that they had put in place,
which their policies lined up with exactly
what you have done in this particular case.
So they went forward then
with a ban on engineered stone after that.
Are you concerned that this is just a stop gap measure
that we've still got based on their evidence?
We've still got a real issue in this area,
and it's not going to go away
by these harm minimization tools that you have recommended.
And I believe that's a live discussion with MB
and the minister at the moment.
So, uh, what I will talk about is
what it looks like when we go out and talk to businesses.
And I've actually done a ride along with one of those.
So the ways that, you know,
we mitigate that risk at the moment.
And there has been a huge amount
of progress made in the engineered stone industry.
You know, we are not finding any
evidence now of dry cutting.
So that's a huge step forward on, its on its own.
But when we go out, we sit with the workers in each
of these places, we talk to them about
how they monitor their health, PPE fitting,
we look at the dust, uh, we look at their routines
for clearing the dust where they dispose of it.
So I'm really confident that the approach that we use,
and there's only 157 businesses, so they're, you know,
reasonably easy for us to get around.
I'm really confident that we have some good controls in
place with the, um, with the regulations
and the law that we have at the moment.
But would you also be taking in the,
what Australia found in their research that
that was still not enough?
And definitely the New Zealand Thoracic Society are saying
exactly the same with what they're seeing coming
through from people who have all these in place,
these mitigations in place,
but they're still seeing people who are within a couple
of years have pretty bad lung disease already.
So is that of concern?
Yeah. Yeah. And I think ultimately it's a, we,
we've gotta work within the, the settings that we have and,
and getting safe practices is, is,
is what's within WorkSafe control at this point.
And, and encouraging people to, to step up their game.
And I think it's also in the context of, um, uh, it's,
it's a question for the government about whether
to ban the substance.
It's not ours, but, you know, in our context,
we're interested in people doing what needs to be done
to make the work as safe as possible.
We've got a range of different work, um, environments
where if you're not working safely with it, it's, you know,
fatal electricity would be another example.
You know, the, the, the ban
or not to ban kind of question is something
that we don't necessarily have the ability to,
um, operate within.
But we, we work with what we've got. Thank
You.
Um, sorry, grant.
Yeah, thanks, uh, chair.
And, uh, good to see you here to see Murray.
Good ways to see something the north come down.
See, um, look, my questions
around your strategic, um, priorities.
Have you found the reception from small business in
particular with your change of focus
and more supporting working with, um,
those businesses to educate?
How have you found that has been received?
Uh, look, we always, we do take an
approach to engage every time.
I think you see that in some of our statistics,
which we're pretty proud of, know over 70% of the people
that we engage with say they got value
and made a, a change as a result.
So we do start with engage.
I think, um, you'll be aware in our strategic initiatives
that improving the guidance is a big part of how we engage
and that helps small business.
It also helps our inspectors to be able to, you know, make
that connection and pass on the right information.
So I think generally, um, the strategic programs,
we've got work for big and small business. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Yeah. But obviously,
'cause it was highlighted actually the minister highlighted
that, that the road show showed
that small business in particular was struggling to work out
what they, what they had to do
to actually meet their obligations.
So they didn't always understand the obligations themselves.
And so you have you found
that you've made good progress in that space?
Yeah, well, yeah, absolutely. I think yes.
And we are working hard to update some
of the guidance in those big areas, as you mentioned.
Yeah. So I would say yes and statistics are supporting that.
Have we got more to do? Yes.
Yeah, just one second.
So the reality is that, um, business people will tell you
that there will be some risk, um, in all sorts of, uh,
it could be serious risk or it could be low level risk.
Yeah. So ultimately, I mean, it's not possible
to completely eliminate all risks.
It's about managing that risks.
So how do you kind of, uh, bring that balance there so
that people understand
that it's not like complete elimination of risk
otherwise no work in harm, it's managing those risks so
that nobody's harm or minimal.
Yeah. Yeah. Look, I mean, I mean that's,
that's definitely our message.
So our message is that, uh,
when we visit A-A-P-C-B-U business, it's their business,
their work, their workers.
And so their first duty is to identify their own risks.
We can obviously help them with that
because we know what's common in that industry.
We've developed a range of standardized assessments,
which talks about each industry
and the common risks that we see.
So our inspectors will be going out in a really consistent
way and talking about what those risks are.
So, you know, I firmly believe
that most businesses do actually want to do the right thing.
It's our job to help 'em find what that right thing is.
Yeah. A quick, yep. Mm-hmm.
So, uh, sometimes the risk, uh, could be just human error.
The, yeah. So how do you kind of convey that as well?
Because it's the responsibility
of the employer towards their employees mm-hmm.
And the responsibility
of an employee towards their coworkers.
Mm-hmm. So it's like basically every individual is
kind of responsible.
Yeah, everyone is responsible. That's right.
Um, the weight generally sit with businesses
because they have control over the investment they make
and the controls that they put in place on their work site.
So, you know, it's up to them
to correct if they're seeing a behavior that they don't want
to see to train for it in the first place to provide the PPE
and the, the, you know, the situation that is safe.
But I agree, everyone plays a part in it. Okay. Lauren Sunan
Pops up and then, yeah.
Thank you. I actually really want to build on
what Grant ask in terms of small businesses,
because I do believe
that this has always been the tension
when it comes to health and safety.
Mm-hmm. Um, one of the things that, that new,
new Zealand's good
and kind of publicize openly is that we are one
of the easiest countries in the world to do business,
but we're also actually one of the hardest countries in
the world to do business.
Well. And I'm just looking at
what work you are doing in terms of this working with MB
or even IID when you're starting a business,
what information is
provided to people who understand small business ahead
of time to go, because I'm looking at the checklist
because there's no,
because nothing on there talk about a c levies,
but there's nothing on there on what is expected of you
as A-P-C-B-U.
Is there something that you are working
with other agencies on to kind of bring some of
that information upfront before people start a business,
before they're locked in?
The big challenge is getting
that information at just the right point in time.
Because if you think about,
and certainly in, in the past many years ago, uh,
the Department of Labor did used to work
with the company's office, so that on the day
that you registered your company,
you got this little information about
what health and safety Yes.
Uh, you know, obligations came with that.
And I guess the challenge is, as we've learned is that,
you know, you might register a company today
but not really employ workers or, or,
or need that information for, for some time.
Mm-hmm. And it's about, you know, just,
just tapping in at the exact moment when
people need that information.
'cause that's when it's gonna be received.
So it is an ongoing, uh, challenge
for us to, to work through that.
It is something for you to consider.
Right? Yeah, absolutely. Totally. So the work
that we're doing in the digital space,
we hope will let us serve up information in a more
tailored way to businesses.
So, you know, we will know, you know, the business
that you're in, what you're interested in.
So as we change guidance, as we see articles of interest,
we hope to be able to tailor it
and feed it through to in individuals.
Mm-hmm. Instead of putting it on our
website, we have to go and find it.
So that's definitely the direction of travel
that you'll see in some of our data
and digital programs listed in the annual review. Cool.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, look, if you manage to get 70%
of people to change something on a, on a, um, basis
of advice, that, um, is pretty amazing as a gp,
I think I'd be lucky if 20% of people
took up any the advice that I gave them.
So I'm pretty impressed with that.
Um, have you got any other, um, you know, outcomes
that you've measured from your work that, um, highlight
that success and, um, as a and a and on balance?
Is there anything where you felt that, um,
there was more work to be done?
That's a good question. Uh, look, I think, um, one
of the things that I see, and this is not a, a claim
for WorkSafe to make on its own,
but one of the things we do see in New Zealand is changes in
culture and investment more generally.
And that seems to be across the board,
whether it's a small business or a big business.
'cause it doesn't have to be a lot of money
to make it a safer workplace.
So some of the, uh, trends that we're seeing come
through in cultural surveys are showing that the direction
of travel for New Zealand is going in the right direction.
And we're definitely seeing that born out in some of our,
you know, fatality and serious harm stats
that Murray mentioned earlier.
Now really, uh, to, to reduce by 50%.
We first started the baseline 2008, um,
we look at it in chunks of three years.
So 50% reduction from then to now is really impressive.
Mm-hmm. We are reporting a stat now, I think of 1.6, uh,
fatalities per a hundred thousand Australia's at 1.3.
So, you know, anything more than zero is always gonna be too
many, but our trend going in the right direction.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. And that's, as I mentioned, not just us,
that's culture, that's business,
that's the hardware of a lot of people. Mm-hmm.
And further work that's been identified, was it were gaps
or things that you feel that needs do more of
or didn't quite meet where you are aiming for? Look,
I think it's all in our strategic programs.
It's upskilling our own spectrum and having more of them.
It's been more targeted about the businesses
that we visit mm-hmm.
Which we can do as we start building our digital data.
And we've made a good start with that now.
And then the other, the other bit would be in,
would be in guidance. Right. Thank you. Yeah.
De Lauren your primary. Yes. Uh, thank you chair.
Just, um, checking with you chair that, um, this question
goes into the next part in part two with performance.
Sorry. Do you mind if I just go back
to Mark Course? He's got a sub.
Yep. Yeah. Thank you Chair. I'm just sub Vanessa's
question, um, just your answer to what, so we, we,
1.6 per hundred thousand
and Australia was, um, 1.3 per hundred thousand.
Is that rock? Um, I'm picking, you know, we talk about,
about the forestry sectors and the ag sectors.
How do, are we comparing,
and I have asked this in this, uh, committee before apples
and apples, because the bulk
of our forestry is on hill country.
Mm-hmm. Um, and the bulk
of our farming is on hill country versus Australia is, um,
flat predominantly.
So how, I guess when we, when we compare, are we very,
are we careful to take that into account?
We absolutely are. And you're right, the, the mix
of industries different.
And of course Australia has a lot more mining Yes.
Than we do, which is dangerous in its own.
So there's, there's definitely some variances,
but what we do look as at the trend of the reduction
and make sure that we are matching that. And we are. Yep.
Yep. Thank you. Okay.
Lawrence is primary, uh, thank you chair.
Um, just this is kind of crossover between part one
and part two in terms of performance as well
and the pickup on kind of, um, performance against measures.
And one of the things that you've had as part
of your vision, uh, priority sector plans,
and this is looking at page 15 to seven to 18 of your,
sorry, 19 of your annual report.
Um, I'm seeing kind of progress
progression against some of these priorities,
but what I'm not seeing is a tangible measure in there.
Is there any sort of tangible measure you are
looking at for some of these?
So for example, if you're looking at acute, chronic
or catastrophic and et cetera, are you putting a number to
what percentage of how much you want to see reduced in 2024?
And how does that shape your thinking going forward in terms
of, this is where we're tr looking at terms of trend.
I think you just mentioned a little bit about
trend, but Yeah, I'm just curious.
You mentioned actions and progress,
but not working towards a target.
Look, I'll start this and I'll
Pastor Kelly to finish it off.
So, uh, for the, those, those are system measures
and so we measure the, the feeders
that we make into the system that we can control.
Um, so the system measures belong to everyone.
And whilst we absolutely keep an eye on trends,
those measures, uh, was set some time ago.
Mm-hmm. Get that 2020.
Yeah, that's right. And I guess it is that context of, um,
uh, previous governments have set system targets
and that's why, you know, that we, we've achieved that.
We can, we can track that downward trend.
But I guess ultimately, um, the idea
of setting targets will see, instead of accepting X number
of deaths, we'll accept fewer, you know, there,
there are ethical issues with that for a regulator.
Um, actually what we're interested in is just continuing
to seeing that downward trend.
Mm-hmm. And, um, you know, a little bit like, um, you know,
police and crime rates, you know, that you've got a role
to play in that we can't necessarily be accountable
for the full because there is a, there's an element of
what businesses are doing, what workers themselves are
doing, um, and how the whole system is working together.
So we watch it with great interest
and we wanna see, keep it continuing go down.
Um, but we're not gonna necessarily see value in setting
targets or owning that system performance all on our own.
'cause that's not necessarily gonna see us
Out. Well, um,
Just supplementary on that.
Um, that's fair.
That was just an example I was giving,
but I was looking at the broader sort of what are some
of the, the targets you are hitting.
Is that right? Not just that particular one.
Um, like that was maybe a bad example to use. Yeah.
So we've got 14 measures altogether. Yeah.
That's split between now S-P-E-S-O-I, um,
and multi-category appropriations.
So they look at things like,
do people find our guidance useful?
Is it up to date? Uh, how are we increasing?
Are we increasingly using different, um,
enforcement tools like, um, enforceful undertakings,
are people happy with the authorizations process?
So there's measures of quality, timeliness
and, um, usage in there.
Oh, sorry. Um, in terms of some of the measures
and particularly like, you know, how many people find our
information, is that when you're collecting those data
and then tracking against that measure,
are the data you're collecting self
as in, uh, what is it called?
Um, are they based on the people who are going
to submit feedback to you anyway?
Or are they, how do you then collect those
data to ensure Mm,
They, we actively, um, follow up with people that we,
that have had interaction with WorkSafe.
Cool. So we, you know, we don't, we won't,
don't wait. Soliciting,
Self selecting with what else.
Yeah. No, definitely follow
And an independent monitor. Yeah.
Yeah. That's sounds separate. Couple
Of, um, questions I wanna ask on this point, just in terms
of that point you made about the direction, um,
that you have as the regulator.
We saw the challenges in a different space with the road
to zero, the, the, the reality that we will never get
to zero and it created a whole lot of work
and then spend that was not frankly justifiable.
How do you manage your role in balancing
this a similar challenge where
New Zealanders would love there
to be zero deaths in the workplace.
Um, however, we also know that that's
ultimately, uh, never gonna happen.
Mm-hmm. So how do you balance where you land between that
move towards, uh, improving the, um,
number of us that stay alive at work, um,
and not overburdening the system?
So I mean, the focus we take is to focus on the things
that we know kill and harm people.
So the critical risks.
So we know if we can make a substantial difference in those
areas, that that will by default, you know,
exponentially change the outcomes of the statistics.
And also it's the most efficient way for us
to focus our resources because we know those are the risks
and harms that we need to focus on.
So appreciate that. And without, like, this is an, uh, uh,
an attack on WorkSafe,
but one of the things certainly that, that I hear
every time I go into a workplace in my electorate mm-hmm.
Is the burden of, um, health
and safety regulation expectation, uh,
and how that's in the eyes of many workplaces,
both employer and employee, an overburden, um, on,
on the job that they're doing.
How do you take that feedback
and filter that through as an organization
and go, yeah, we, we, we, we aren't being clear enough here,
or we've gone too far here, or,
or actually we've, um, we've put up a, a, a framework
that is not practical in the workplace.
How much of that goes on as an organization? Hmm.
So I think, um, what you're seeing through some
of the feedback that has been received is some work being
done in those areas at the moment.
Um, there's obviously always a tension between
how much you do and doing it in a really, you know,
sensible way, proportionate way.
And that's what we try to achieve.
We, um, obviously are not a policy shop.
We don't set the policy for health, uh, work health
and safety, although we do feed in what we see every day.
But, you know, the point I think was actually one
of the examples in the annual report, and as I mentioned
before, not all health
and safety improvements need to cost a lot of money.
It can be as simple as PPE, it can be as simple
as the way you organize yourself,
having daily meetings on site with your workers.
So, um, in most cases, improved health and safety outcomes
and complying, you know,
with the laws are not mutually exclusive.
So just take for example, that daily meeting one when,
and I I'm, what I'm trying
to understand is the culture in your organization as opposed
to the specific example.
So just take the, the daily meeting when
that suggestion is put forward in a particular industry,
oh look, there's a clearly a problem.
We're gonna propose that they have a daily meeting.
Is there a filter of how much is that gonna cost in terms of
that that industry's efficiency or.dot, dot.
Like, does that come into the consideration?
Is it clearly in your process of thinking about
what you're gonna recommend,
what the impact is on efficiency, productivity,
financial performance,
even employee attitude to some of these things?
Like, you know, one of the things we hear as employees,
you know, see these meetings as a tick box.
And I think that's the, the key there is that, you know,
um, WorkSafe doesn't set those
requirements for, for business.
Um, our policy shop does if, if it's in the law.
But if we're putting it in guidance saying we think
that this is a good idea, that's always developed in
consultation and alongside industry.
So we are willing to hear, you know, what's working for you,
what's, what does good look like?
And we are kind of more codifying
that in our guidance rather than actually imposing it
because it is about, ultimately the businesses are the ones
that have the duty to keep their workers safe.
So they have to kind of come up
with a way that works best for them.
So that kind of cost and benefit analysis,
it's not quite in a formal way
that you might get in a regulation sort
of development process, but it does happen in consultation
when we work with industry representatives.
Okay. I won't keep laboring that point.
My other, um, my other question is related to the,
the performance information and supporting systems.
Um, within WorkSafe, we've seen a drop from good
to needs improvement around the, um, the measurement of
that activity in the year under review.
Just wondering what, um, you are doing
to ensure the reliability
of your performance, um, reporting.
Yeah, thank you. So that, uh, comment relates to the data
and the way we could measure, um, a couple of, two
or three measures actually.
So it's a legacy, legacy issue related to our data
and measurements from last year.
Our measurements that have been selected this year have been
selected because we are confident to have robust data
to be able to support them.
So it's historical if you like,
but we are also investing, um, as you'll see a lot of, uh,
time and energy into our data
and digital so we can have more confidence in the
data that we report.
So, um, we can talk about this same time next year,
but I expect to see that restored next year based on the
measures and the data we have behind it.
Okay. Great. And you're confident that
what you are measuring, um, so I get the point
that you're measuring what you've got data Yeah.
For Yeah. Are you confident that
what you're measuring is a reasonable, um,
measure of performance?
That that is indicative of the performance
of the organization as opposed
to you're measuring the only things you can
'cause that's the only things you have data for if you
Yeah, no, that that's fair enough.
Uh, and yes is the answer.
So we went through a big exercise, uh, at the beginning
of this year, reset our outcome measures.
There is some rationale in our statement of, um, intent.
Yeah. And there's a whole lot more sitting behind it.
So it was built up with some science behind it. Absolutely.
Right. Okay. So members will move to part two now,
and, um, Jan's got a question and then we'll line,
And it's probably a little bit of a suck
coming from that one.
Good segue, part two, uh, around the measurements.
And, uh, like when I was reading
through the performance measurements, you know,
there's a lot of people are, recipients are satisfied,
they're feeling good about the advice
that's been given to them.
But can you please elaborate a little bit more on the actual
evidence that you have that shows that the advice
that you are giving changes behavior or not?
So not just the feeling
or the them saying that they've enjoyed their advice
or feel good about it.
What is the actual evidence that their behavior has
Changed? Did they do something
good? Yeah.
So 73% of businesses identified health
and safety improvements following an interaction
with a WorkSafe inspector. So we
Would, and they've, sorry, can I just interrupt?
I don't mean to, to interrupt you's. Okay. Thank you.
Um, it's just they've identified them.
It, how is I, I really wanna get the sense of how
that's being triangulated, that, you know,
that that has happened.
You know, those changes have happened.
It's not just people saying on a survey that they
I see what you're saying. Yeah, yeah. Sorry, I'm
Probably not articulating As well. No, no, I
get it. Um, so we actually do a closed loop.
So when we go out to a business
and we will make a recommendation.
So it could be verbal
or it could be, you know, more serious.
It could be a written one. We actually closed the loop
and we asked the business to confirm to us
and show you the, that we've, um,
that they've made the change.
So thank you. Okay.
Yeah. Lawrence, thank you. Uh, thank you, chair.
I've actually already moved down to part two,
my previous, yeah.
Um, but can I just check, so one of the things, uh, in terms
of your performance against the intention
of the RO con tip line, which is managed by WorkSafe, um,
can I just check based on your findings,
how many RO cones has been removed
as a result of that tip line?
I couldn't tell you how many exactly.
I can, um, you'll have seen the reports
that we've made about how many reviews we've done
and how many we found to be non-compliant.
So there's been about six to 8% of sites that we visited
that were over compliant.
And the main, most of them were,
and of course, they are complying in a lot of cases with,
um, consents that were issued sometimes months,
sometimes years ago.
This, in terms of some of the documents
that we have received, I think based on, uh, when was this,
I think last month, um,
there's been 200 RO cones have been removed.
Some of the larger areas, including NZTA, for example, uh,
and also Auckland Transport, don't know
how many have been removed.
Mm-hmm. And furthermore,
some areas like Monga Newi has seen a increase in RO con
usage as a result of the tip line.
Very cool. Um, how do you manage some of
that against the performance indicated that that's expected
of, or what are you planning on for that feedback? Sure.
So look, what we were asked to do was to, to set up a,
a hotline to, to gather information
and then to identify the causes, what was sitting
behind the public perception
that there were too many road things.
Okay. Um, and then we were also asked to help work with NZTA
to educate people about what was the intersection
between WorkSafe and the NZTA.
So through the Road Co pilot, we did all of those things.
We got the feedback, we were, we were able to establish
that it's actually not a case of over compliance,
even though that was often the public perception.
Interesting. Um, most of them were actually, uh, in line
with their consents.
Yeah. But what we also know is that, uh, we are moving
to a new form of risk-based consent, which is rolling
through and over time, you would expect
to see more risk-based temporary traffic management.
But, um, this doesn't sit in my domain.
I'd just like to say this sits with NZTA,
but we've been working very closely with NZT Good
and the councils, and we've been doing joint education, uh,
sessions with the councils
so they understand what's WorkSafe, um, you know,
temporary traffic management, what's n zts,
what does the new TTM look like,
and then how do we work together?
So we've done, I know dozens of them,
and it's been really well received.
Just, sorry, Chi two more subs.
One of them is, you mentioned that in terms of compliance
and, you know, you've seen maybe six to 8%, did you say
That we're over compliant?
Over compliant? Mm-hmm.
Um, so in those cases, when you be like, that's too much,
um, who determines the compliance amount?
Is that through? Is that through?
No, so that gets set.
Uh, so when, when a job is started, the contractor applies
for a consent through the road controlling authority.
Ah, okay. They get issued a consent.
And so that the public perception was
that there was too much TTM,
but in most cases, we found
that those businesses were complying with the
Consent. And
one final question.
Do you know how much, uh, budget
or how much has been spent thus far on the line?
Uh, look, it was really modest.
So I think it's the end of September.
We'd spent about 150,000,
but about 50,000 of that was education
for our inspectors as well.
So we put them all through a traffic management course,
which they'll continue to use
'cause when they go to construction sites, et cetera.
So some of it was a one-off cost.
Can, can I just, um, ask a question?
Couple of questions here. So if I'm understanding your
comment correctly, the consent details, the number
of road cones that need to be out, right.
So the public perception that there are too many road cones
could still be entirely valid.
It's just that there's a box that said on that stretch
of road, there needed to be X number of road cones.
And essentially you've checked and said
Correct.
Right. And I suppose that speaks to my
Concern around the culture.
And it might be that you are constrained around
what you were and weren't allowed to do in this process.
Um, or it might be that you weren't bold enough in your
feedback because the fact
that the original consent said there needed to be 10 or 20
or a hundred or a thousand doesn't actually, um,
validate that that's an appropriate number.
And the average punter,
including my constituents in Wang Nui, um,
could be good place entirely.
Um, uh, within reason
to say there are too many road cones on the road.
'cause I, for one, cannot understand why the average driver
needs one every two meters instead of one every five meters.
I wanna be really clear on this
because this is, um, a common misconception.
So, um, WorkSafe does not manage the temporary traffic
management consenting process.
NZTA have launched a new NZ uh, GT TM guy,
which is a risk-based guy.
It's quite a departure from the more prescriptive one.
Mm-hmm. And they have, uh,
I think this month actually was the date that all
of the RCAs had to have their plan in place to embrace that.
So I'm talking about someone else's business here,
which I'm very mindful of.
So there is a risk-based approach coming in, um,
a very good change in management plan, which we are part
of on the industry advisory group.
Mm. So, um, yeah, so work in progress. Yeah. Thanks.
So last question on this, and then we'll move on.
Um, if something goes wrong in an industry,
any industry, right?
WorkSafe is the first to come out
and go, we're gonna do an investigation, we're gonna, um,
take action against directors.
We're going to, you know, do these things.
How often does WorkSafe come out
and go, we think there's
too much going on in this industry,
and actually we're gonna do an investigation
and have a look at whether or not they could pull back on
the layers of bureaucracy
or activity, um, to free up productivity in
that industry? Do you get my question?
Um, I do. It's beyond our remit, to be honest.
We would always provide feedback
to our policy agency if we saw some systemic issues.
But when people get hurt
or killed on a WorkSafe, it's our duty
to turn up and investigate it.
But surely you've got some ability,
if on the one hand you are saying it's an industry,
you've got it wrong, you haven't complied too much,
surely there's a counterbalance to go, we, we haven't
provided enough clarity here.
Or the why our previous, um,
input is being implemented is, is overburdensome.
And, and maybe we should look at that industry and,
and make clearer what our view is as the counterbalance.
That's absolutely what we're doing
through our guidance at the moment.
Okay. So we, we are, you know, there's confusion.
That's what we've prioritized in our
guidance. Absolutely. We
Would love to see next year, I'm sure some feedback on
we have done that and how that's landed
as the counterbalance to the Yeah,
Completely. The, the, the
important Role you play where there
Are workplace,
And we might talk about it a bit later,
but industry are going to be in the driving seat for,
you know, rewriting that guidance
and really, um, co-designing it with us.
So I would expect to see some very
big progress over the next. Cool.
Lawrence, I keen to move on,
but I'll give you a chance to No, I,
I think just this ties into kind of both the past,
but I guess the, the,
just following on from the chair's question, what sort
of guidance do you provide,
or even in this case, how do you work with n the TA who then
decide some of these and then go down to the RCAs
on asking the question is
how are you demonstrating
that this particular thing is actually supporting health
and safety or supporting safety at work?
Yeah. What are the tangible factors you,
let's say using as example?
Mm-hmm. Um, do you have conversations,
for example, TA and the TAs?
Like, you know, is it
actually providing health safety to people
and that applied to all of the other things? Is it?
Yeah. Okay. No, I understand the question.
So, um, the,
the new TTM new temporary Traffic management guide is
actually built off.
So it's basically saying you need
to look at the unique risks
and manage those in, in a unique way for
that site rather than doing a tick box.
Yeah. So the philosophy is a risk-based approach should
always be saved every time.
And we are part of the industry advisory group,
which has got utility companies, you know, big contractors,
road controlling authorities.
So there is a coalition of the willing Yeah.
Working together to make sure that this is well understood.
Thank you. That's helpful. Okay,
Let's move on. Um,
Jan, you've got a primary Okay.
Thank, you've got some questions around financials
and they're pretty, um, just wanting
to some clarification on the financials.
So if we go to page 52 of the annual report,
I'm quite interested to know of the,
it's roughly $10 million between, um, in the personnel
and salaries and wages between 2024 and 2025.
And the rationale reason behind that.
So look, I'll, I'll make a start on that
and then I will introduce you to Keeley Craig,
who's subbed in from the bench.
Keeley is our deputy chief executive for corporate.
So, um, look, our personnel costs changed, uh, year on year
for a couple of different reasons.
Uh, one was some cost constraints that we, we brought in.
So better cost controls.
The main reason was that we went
through a significant restructure.
Um, we went through two actually in the last two years,
but in the most recent year, we, uh,
aligned our workforce with our strategy.
We had some, uh, prolonged, uh,
consultation discussions around that.
And during that time we weren't able to recruit.
And so, uh, we built up some vacancies over that time.
Okay. Something add to that, um,
well, sorry, the other thing
That I would just add into that is
that in 2024 other costs there was,
it was a bigger restructure, so there were more, um,
redundancy costs in that year.
Yeah. Is it Okay,
I've just got three on financials, I just fire away on them.
Um, the a CC multi-year funding agreement at the top of
that same page, the agreement was concluded during the year,
and I'm guessing that's why it was quite down
on the previous year.
I guess I just wanna make sure that
that work is continuing on around that
because that's quite a big difference in your funding
that you are getting not getting from a CC.
Yeah, so the funding went and the work went as well.
So that stopped at the end of March.
And, uh, a CC had taken
that work back into the organization.
So, uh, essentially we were acting as a, a pass on service
or an intermediary,
and both agencies agreed
that it was more efficient if it was just done through a CC.
And that was part of our strategic reset as well.
You can, um, go back to the a CC estimates hearing
and there's a good Oh, right, okay.
Yeah, sorry, I wasn't that okay.
Hearing, so, yeah, no, thank you.
Um, and the other question I have there is on page 53
in the other expenses, you have a line there
that says other expenses,
it's quite different from the previous year.
Could you just outline what that is please?
Other expenses? Which line? Sorry.
So in other, there is another one
that's called other expenses,
Um, I'm not sure of the detail behind that, but
Complied that, we'll put that in writing to you.
Thank you. Level. I've got a strategic one, but I'll Okay.
We'll stay, stay here for a minute, Lawrence.
Cool there. Thank you, chair.
I just have a couple of questions based on your, um, sort
of prehearing response.
Um, one of the ones is looking at the fact
that there is an additional contract being done this year,
this financial year with Three Plus Consulting Limited.
Could you speak a bit more on what
that $1.1 million contract is?
Lemme just start. Yeah. Yeah.
So, uh, three plus work with us on three different sort
of sections if you like.
So they were involved in our, our strategic refresh
and then they were involved in helping set up our
Inspectorate Pathways plan.
So they did a lot of work on the work, uh, ahead
of our restructure where we bought all our Inspectorate into
one group.
Uh, they finished with us at the end of June. Okay.
That was gonna what I was gonna check,
is it a one off sort of thing? Was it a,
Oh, I mean, just, just to be clear, they're part
of the government panel and so they finished
that work at the end of June, but they continue to tender
and do work for us as required.
So I don't wanna mislead you. Okay.
But that particular piece
of work finished at the end of June. Sure.
So in that case, can I just check building on on that, um,
because I've also see
that there's been some operational savings, um,
for the last financial year.
How much that financial savings within the core opex
of WorkSafe has now been transitioned into
money spent on contractors instead?
It's not, it's not unlike the like, swap at all.
So we've spent quite a, a low amount on contractors
and consultants for the last financial year.
It's around eight and a half million dollars,
which is really quite, quite low.
Um, so it wasn't a substitute for other costs.
We only bring contract
or consultants, contractors in
where we need the specialist expertise
and they come in for a short period of time.
And the approach we've taken
to throughout our reforms program is that that transfer
of knowledge needs to come back to the organization.
Right. 'cause once our strategic program is finished, um,
two, three years, we want it still to be part
of our DNA. Great.
Okay. Further then other agencies.
Vanessa, we, uh, we'll move on. Just
Can I just clarify, we're still in section 2, 2 2. Okay.
Okay. And if it's question part
three, happy to move to that.
I've got one strategic financial
Should say that. Yeah, maybe
it would be better. Okay.
Ask yours and then we'll go to be Vanessa, part three. So
Just, um, you've got quite an accumulated operating
surplus that's sitting there, all that be invested in
The strategic work program over the next three years.
Yeah. Well, um, sorry, ke this is your superpower.
I'll start. We finish. Uh, so is 23 million is, um,
what we forecast to spend in the LA next three years.
Um, the bulk of it's setting up our data in digital we this
year, so, absolutely.
So, uh, we are very, um, we're very fortunate
to be able to have the program that we have to be able
to deliver the benefits
because much of the work we are doing now has been
deferred from previous years.
Okay. Great. Well, thank you Vanessa, part three.
Thank you very much. Um, so in, um, some
of your opening remarks
and in the, um, report, um, you've highlighted a lot
of the work you've done in terms of increasing
or in terms of permitting and engagement.
Mm. Um, when it comes to those, um,
permanent permitting activities, um, what is the impact of
that businesses have you, do you measure that?
Um, as well as, um, you know, stating what the,
what you've done that's excellent,
but can you help us to understand what
that really means in a practical sense?
Yeah, absolutely. Some
of this is in our state of intent as well.
So, uh, one of the, um, one of the issues I guess
with our permitting before
is that we were running quite behind.
We did have a backlog.
And so what that does is to create uncertainty
for the people who are applying for the authorizations
and an investment of their time and effort and time
before they can get rolling
with the work that they want to do.
So we have, um, set up 30 day SLA,
which we are largely in line with.
There's some complex cases that sit outside of that.
So essentially it means that if somebody wants
to get authorized and there's work that they want to do,
we are now committing to getting through that fast
so they can start that really important work.
Um, and, um, interested, um, also in, in line with this,
around your comments on the, um, the engineered stone
and, um, the, the work that you've been doing in that.
Um, has any of your, uh, how much
of your work in that regard has been, uh, pre-warned
activity and how much, if any, has been onsite inspections
that have been, that have come as a un
notified visit, if any?
I would have to come back to you on that to give that
to you, um, accurately.
Yeah. But you're absolutely right.
There's some of our visits are, um, an immediate risk
of harm or we've been notified.
Some of them are proactive based on sector. Mm-hmm.
So I'd have to come back
with you on that. Okay. I don't have that off.
Okay. Thank you Lawrence.
Um, part three regulatory roles.
Now, one of the things we were engaging
with the minister just
before was around, um,
the fact that, you know, the minister spokes about wanting
to have guidelines and code of practice instead regulations.
And one of the questions I asked was around accountability.
So in terms of what has been done
within what you've done in this last financially up
until now, in lieu of a legally binding thing that
businesses have to comply with, how
challenging would that be for you
to enforce those rules when there are no real consequences?
Or what are the consequences?
Me, I've seen the extreme end of consequences, of course.
Yes. Um, but what are the consequences for non-compliance?
Noting that the first
and foremost, it's all around education
and working collaboratively, but we can't not anticipate
that something's gonna go it's risk
management. One of them. Yeah.
This is definitely Kelly's superpower.
Kelly has been involved with Hawar since it was born, so,
Um, yeah. And I guess
it's, it's really important to note that, um,
while the absence of regulation is, um, does,
does make things challenging for as far
as giving people clarity about what, what the rules are.
Yeah. The general duties under the Health
and Safety Work Act for every business manage the risks
arising from their work exist no matter what.
And so it's a different proposition
for our inspectors when they go along
and they're seeing something they're not very happy with,
rather than saying, you didn't comply
with the specific rule, you haven't met that general duty
because this hasn't happened.
So what becomes really important is
that we have the guidance,
that we have information about what good looks like.
Uh, it's still enforceable.
It's still absolutely enforceable.
It's just a different kind
of pathway, if you get what I mean.
Okay. You're not saying, um, uh, you've, you, you,
you broke the, the speed limit because that's a hard role.
You know, you, you failed to drive safely in this constant,
both of those, um, they're still, they're still part of
what, what we do on the daily to enforce.
Um, follow up question.
Can I just check, what is work safe's opinion
or view of a shift from safety one to safety two?
Safety one. Uh, I guess, you know, that's part of the,
kind of the broader knowledge, body of knowledge
for the way, um, uh, safety culture
that evolves over time at this point.
You know, what we're, what we, um,
are really interested in is having businesses do that,
thinking for themselves and,
and developing their own, um, innovation.
It doesn't actually change the duty that they have,
if you get what I mean, the law is, is still,
it doesn't change our role.
Um, but that the way that people are evolving,
the way they think about safety is incredibly important,
But are used to when you are going out to businesses
and you are providing this sort
of educational tool and et cetera.
Um, sorry, I got a couple, just two more. Mm-hmm.
Um, one of them is around, you know,
you are looking at mitigation
and then minimization and et cetera.
Is that still the fundamental core tenant in terms
of the re risk matrix?
Um, when you're looking at the house
and safety management? Yeah.
In the sense that that's
what the duties of the act require.
We, we, we, you know, that is, that is the basis
of the way the legislation works, is that you must eliminate
and then minimize, but the ways you go about doing
that might, might change depending
on the, the circumstances.
Yeah. And one of the final things is what has
what was previously really helpful is
that when WorkSafe go in the go into businesses
and look at the way they're compliant with hawa,
and if they are, they get a certificate,
which re which then led to when,
I know I touched on this in previous hearings,
but it was genuinely very helpful.
They get a 20% discount in terms of a CC levy.
Is there any consideration of introducing, uh, a system,
something like that, which allows people,
rather than just a reactive approach, going there
with a proactive approach,
and then there is something for the businesses to get out of
that if they're compliant.
So that's, um, referring to a previous a CC, um, scheme,
which WorkSafe or the previous regulator had a role in
providing input too, but we haven't never kind
of signed off on businesses, um, proactively,
but yes, that, that's, that's, that's an a
that's a question for a CCC scheme.
Cool. Okay,
Grant. Yeah.
Um, thanks you. Now moving on to your,
your focus areas and, um, the, the,
the same focus areas quite some time.
Um, the way I've got a bit of background in,
obviously is the agricultural space.
Mm-hmm. Is, is that, have we been making any progress in
that space in terms of overall safety?
Our first question, if you don't mind.
Well, we've, um, we've actually in the last quarter ran a
campaign with a campaign.
So over a quarter we'll visit farms
and talk about high hazards and machinery.
Mm. So we are making progress in that we've, um, connecting
with the industry and that we are working
with the industry bodies.
Mm-hmm. Um, as you'll know, the, uh, the harm and fatalities
and agriculture still disproportionate 25% Yeah.
Compared with 6% of the workers. So work to do.
And again, you know, we are, we are doing what we can,
there's a lot of work to do at a system level there as well.
And so what, what, um,
what particular areas are you trying to focus on?
Because obviously we have made
significant progress over time.
Yes. So you, are you working, looking to work more
with industry bodies now?
Is it, do you think it's just a cultural thing within this
Look, I think it's both. And
I'll hand over to Murray. Yeah.
He's probably desperate to say something here. Um,
Probably is, but I think it's, it's cultural
and, uh, the industry is, I mean,
there are industry bodies Yeah.
But it's a big sector and it's a really diverse sector.
And so it's probably harder for industry bodies to,
to form over one, you know, over all of agriculture.
Mm-hmm. But culture for certain.
And, um, Murray, you'll have a view on that, I'm sure.
Yeah. Look, I, I, yeah, I do have a view on it
and that the statistics aren't good enough.
Mm-hmm. Um, you, I think WorkSafe
and it's new focused role around, um, engaging,
enforcing, um,
and influencing business through these coded practices is,
is gonna be really important in this area.
Mm-hmm. And,
and yeah, every single person in New Zealand
that leaves their home every morning
is entitled to go home at night.
Yeah. And, and, and so we've got to influence in our sphere
of our mandate, sphere of influence where we can,
but that when you get sectors like the primary sector
or the, um, construction sector, it's, it's, it, it, it,
it's spread, uh, it's spread wide and,
and so who is the organization
that has the touch points for them?
Mm-hmm. And so if, if, to your point, um,
around the primary sector, there's multiple touch points.
So who, who you actually engaging with?
And, and that's the, that's the problem.
We, we need to change culture around, uh,
how people operate things.
And, and that's gonna be done by, by the relationships
and engagement we have
with the various parties to influence.
It's not gonna be WorkSafe doing it.
Um, but we can't, don't have the numbers,
but you've gotta find the right parties to influence
A thought in that space.
Is in terms of the culture, do you think that'll change is
'cause the average age of farms
who took the sheep beef sector is relatively high.
Do you think that as the, the next generation comes through,
you'll see that rational shift?
Anecdotally, we ve that
because we know most of the harm in agriculture is, um,
so people age 55 plus.
Mm-hmm. So
That's not correct. And,
and the not, and, and one final supple on,
but the area that still frustrates me is in the, um, is
with the, the, the, the transport area in terms of quads
and, um, and side byside and the usage of those.
Uh, there, there just seems to be,
because no, we had a recent death in Northland, um,
and for the quad 70-year-old,
I think remember some of that space.
Yeah. It just seems, we just seem, don't seem to be able
to make progress in that space.
It's, have you got any particular
plans to really try and target?
Because I think that would really make quite a difference,
just that those two means of transport. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, I mean, we,
we have guidance around it already.
So we strongly recommend crush protection devices,
um, on vehicles.
They give you space. If, if the vehicle rolls, yeah.
Um, you might still get hurt, but it creates space.
There's a, a scheme that's being run at the moment, I think
through a CC and safer farms.
Yeah. That's offering subsidized crush protection.
But our advice is get one.
But yeah, Lawrence, so thank you.
Um, I really wanna pick up on
what Grant has mentioned in terms
of changing the culture culture.
And I'm gonna check kind of going back even further,
because a lot of times when people are entering in those
kind of workspaces or some
of the cultures has already been set, what are you, what,
is there any plans or have you engaged with, let's say WCS
or soon to be ISPs on embedding some of that work,
cultural understanding of health and safety
in education at the earlier stage?
Mm. So when you're looking at, um, certain
subjects, let's say woodworks materials,
horticulture in the school environment,
are you having any hand
or having any conversation with MOE on how do you
embed that culture of health
and safety when people are still at
school learning about some of these?
And another example of that would be economics.
We talk about small businesses, right?
You know, are people,
is there any conversation you're having with MOE through
subjects on how you can embed some of that
or have a, a little module, et cetera within that, um,
for people who may want to be entrepreneurs later on?
Yeah. Look, I can start with some of that
and you might have some more to add to Kelly.
So, um, the answer with M mo E is yes,
we have been engaging with them.
They have a, um, a property arm.
And so I met with them within the last month
because the opportunities there are to work in, you know,
the woodworking and metal work,
and I presume it's still called out these days, and,
and to make sure that one,
they're doing the right thing in schools as far
as PPE and protection goes.
But also that's the opportunity to educate workers as
as they go out into the workforce.
And then of course, we also have guidance on worker rights
and making sure that people understand what to do
if they encounter, um,
something in their workplace that isn't right.
And then thirdly, our inspectors, well,
when they're out on site, will generally talk to the workers
and get a sense from them of
how things are going at that site.
That's not so much what I'm referring to
and I'm referring to, it's good, good
to hear that. You are talking, you're
Talking about curriculum. I'm talking about curriculum.
Yes. Yeah. And I guess it's that context of really, um,
you know, we all have to own our part in, in building
that culture because Yes.
And I'm sure, you know, the, as an ex teacher myself, the,
the curriculum is always seen
as the right place to where you build culture.
But I, I, you know, we've probably, um, as parents
of young workers, as, as employers of young workers,
you know, we've probably got all,
all got a role to play in Yeah.
Building the right culture. Absolutely.
And, and you're learning at school is, is a slice of that,
which, you know, we've certainly got training materials
for young, for young workers
and soon to be workers that, that are available,
um, as resources.
But it's the, it's something broader than that that you kind
of ly that you get at a, uh, almost a subliminal level that,
that WorkSafe can't necessarily kind of, um, yeah.
So we are not working on that broadly,
but industry associations, of course, it's always part
of their curriculum of apprentices,
trainees, et cetera. Yeah.
Yeah. So, um,
my question is about the Research New Zealand survey, um,
that was done, uh, on businesses, uh, visited
by WorkSafe inspectors between July, 2024 and June 25.
Uh, in that, in your report, you say overall 68%
of businesses agreed that they now know more about
what is required for health
and safety in the workplace due to engagement,
the rules, safe inspectors.
Just curious to know about the remaining 32%.
Is it because they already knew what is, um, required
and so engagement was basically just confirming,
or is it like there were some those
who thought they need more engagement, what was happening?
Did, do you look into that?
We will have got the, the full results. Yeah.
So we can, we can look into that.
I suspect some of them that we, you know,
there wasn't anything to find, so they were That's right.
You know, which is, which goes to us, um, making sure
that we are targeting the right businesses to visit.
'cause we wanna make sure that our, our time is worthwhile,
that we're not wasting anybody's time.
Um, some of them it might have been,
and we can look into to the detail of that.
It may have been that, um, we, we didn't having to connect
with the right person who didn't know the answer to
that particular question, but we could
do a breakdown of, of that paper.
That would be great. Thank you so much. Okay.
So we'll capture that as A follow up.
Yep. Um, grant?
Yeah, I just wanna go back to the bikes.
The quad one real bug beer around the fact, like on our,
on our property, we've got, um,
role protectors on both Thes always have had service since
they became a five one camera.
I understand the manufacturers won't put them on
because they have, they, they feel an effective performance
of machine, or I think,
is there any reason why we couldn't make that a mandatory
requirement once that the purchasers have to put them on?
It's, it's a choice for
the government to make. Absolutely.
So there's no, there's no reason
that you can see that you're aware of.
Australia has done that. They, they actually done that
as a consumer, as a consumer safety standard.
They've made it mandatory that, uh, quads sold.
There must be fitted with a rollover,
Any, any used ones and any new ones
Because they, they did, they did initially, uh, as far
as I recall, there,
there was pushback in Australia from the manufacturers.
So where did that all end up?
Um, I suspect they're still kind of working through their,
their choices on that, but at this point,
my my understanding is they're still being sold there, so
Thank you.
Okay. So we're gonna, um, oh, in fact,
I'm just gonna ask myself at this point, which is around,
in terms of the guidance, um,
that you've been prioritizing in these four focus areas,
how do you know that it's ultimately effective
in changing behavior?
So, uh, the guidance that we're working on at the moment,
so the three AOPs we're working on two in
agricultural, one in construction.
So we know that these are priority areas
for those industries because the feedback has come from them
and we agree it matches with what we are seeing.
Um, we believe it'll change behaviors
because we are working collaboratively on it.
So we have an industry, uh,
we have a guidance advisory group,
which looks at guidance at a more, um, holistic level,
strategic level future of guidance.
And then we have actual working groups
that are really down in the detail in the weeds on it.
So by the time we pop out the end with an aop,
we have something that we've written together.
And then how do you test that that has changed behavior.
It would be That goes, that goes to
'cause of broader programs of evaluation and monitoring.
So as you know, that's really as our plan, that
as we develop these documents, we are then able to actually,
uh, undertake research to be able to show
that over time it's gonna take a while,
but we're, we're committed to doing it.
And how do you manage the issue of self-selection?
So take for example, forestry, there's a large amount
of forestry across the wgnu ate, um,
and our visit a number of forest stores on a regular basis,
and it's clear which electric, the, the mighty Nu electric.
Um, and it's,
it's often very clear
what employers are already going above and beyond.
And I wonder when we talk about these things in terms of
who you're consulting, et cetera.
Yeah. Whether it's the ones that are already doing it,
that are giving you the feedback that are,
it's not gonna necessarily change their behavior.
They might learn something from someone else
and then implement it.
Yeah. Acknowledged.
But by and large, they're already going above
and beyond have safety, you know,
as a culture that's working.
And then you've got others who, um,
aren't actively involved.
Yeah. So it's not collaborative with them
because they're noting in how do you change their behavior.
Uh, that's, I mean, the forestry one's a really good
example because you are Right.
We work with, um, the contractors
and forest owners associations,
but we also worked with the small wood lot, um, association.
Yeah. Small wood lot industry body. Yeah.
And in fact, we launched, um, the Acco and Palmerston North
because most of the forestry harm
and deaths actually happen in the central North island on
the smaller wood lots.
Wow. So the, the industry group, you know, provide us with
that information helped us make the connections.
We did, I don't know about 13 road shows
after that with the industry associations
to make sure we reached as many people as we had.
And you're right in the audience, we had some, you know,
really big organizations who said,
yep, we're doing this already.
Yeah. But then there were some smaller ones,
and this was new news to them.
So that real cross pollination of ideas in those, um,
meetings is just as important as us being on the road.
It's hearing from other
contractors who are already doing this well.
So it would be interesting, maybe in the future to
raise this again with you around
what consideration you've given
or what approach you've given to capturing those that are,
um, not engaging in the process.
Yeah. Because even in what you've explained Yeah.
There's a large level of self-selection. Yes.
Um, and of course, if you ever wanna promote something
around forestry instead of the Mighty Palms North,
which had lots of trees in the middle of Palms North, not,
um, you're welcome to come to, um, the Wang ra.
Good to know I did that just for
Draft. Can I, can I just make further comment
to that, that,
you know, I think these, these bits
of work are really important.
Yeah. The industry codes of practice
and the uptake of that is, is really important
because it's, it's the industry developing them in, in,
in tandem with consultation.
So it's it's owned by the industry. Yeah.
It's supported by website, but owned by the industry.
So this is my point earlier around, when you get industry
that's really wide,
how does the industry itself bring itself together
to actually uptake this information?
It's not WorkSafe role to do it that we,
we are the regulator, but we are supporting industry
to develop their own protocols.
And then it's up to them
or a body that represents them to then update that.
And if they don't want to do that, then you,
you end up in the next phase of, um, being regulated.
If that's, if that's the case.
So, uh, I, I think this is, this is a really important piece
of work, and I think it's, it's part of the picture
and the, the, the outcome at the end in terms of measurement
of success is, is really important.
And I take that point,
although I suppose my challenge is how do you make sure
that in the, um, consultation you are doing, you are,
you are engaging those that are, uh, not self-selecting in.
Because the other side of the argument is
it's not a competitor's responsibility
To get their competitor to raise their standards.
Right? Yes. That's right. That's right.
So it's, but I think we're all sort
of on a similar page. Jan,
I'll go to your, um, question.
Thank you. And I want to go back to the enforce, um, area
that we're talking about here as part
of the regulatory functions.
Uh, and you talked there
as your performance measures about the number of businesses
or prosecutions
that result in relevant parties and held to account.
But what I couldn't get a sense of is
how many is that in the first place?
So how many businesses has WorkSafe Pro prosecuted
in that previous year?
We've talked about the ones that are disposed, haven't we?
Rather than the ones, I'd have to come back to you on that.
Okay. So you're, you're looking at the pipeline
of prosecution, is that what you're after? Yeah.
Yeah. Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
We'll have to come back to you on that one. Um, yeah,
I just wanna know how really prolific that is,
because I get a sense that we've been talking about reforms
and changes mm-hmm.
Around the fact that businesses have felt
scared of work safe.
Mm-hmm. And is that, is there a correlation between that
and the number of prosecutions?
No, we are not seeing a big spike.
So, um, in fact, I mean, while I've got the opportunity,
talk about the different sort of tools that we are using,
because, you know, enforceable undertakings is another tool
that we are using increasingly more.
And so enforceable undertakings is something
that we can offer as an option to prosecution,
where the business, you know, is admitting
that something went wrong, the victim
or their family is happy to enter into it
and work safe obviously as well.
So enforceful undertakings,
we've done more in the last 20 months than we've
done in the previous four years.
And so it's a really, um, constructive way
to add benefit to the industry.
So what it does is they, they'll agree with us
to provide some sort of industry, uh, guidance, training,
something that will benefit the whole industry
and lift the industry as a result
of something terrible happening.
And, you know, just in, in the time that we've been running,
you use, I think about 16 million has gone back
into industry to lift it.
So I I, I'd hate this committee to think
that we go to prosecution. Yeah. So the
First time. So, but,
but I've been going back
and looking at previous figures
and there doesn't seem to be a big
correlation between that anyway.
There hasn't been no huge amount of prosecutions. No.
Historically. So why are businesses saying they've got
that fear of WorkSafe when there never has been
that huge number of prosecutions?
It's not borne out by fact. Right.
And even in the traffic management space,
I think there's been one ever one the latest living memory.
So look, that's, you know, that's part of us.
It's our brand. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So we'll step into that.
But you're right, the, the figures don't correlate. No.
Okay. Thank you. We do have another
primary if we opportunity. Do you
Have a, yeah, I have a supplementary just following up in
terms of prosecution, would you be,
and we're happy to come back to this,
would you have any data around, um,
how many infringement notices
Online sports safety sheet?
Yes. We do have infringement
For the 20, let's say the last financial year.
So 24 to 25.
Yeah. Um, noting the, uh, the spoiler alert, they will be,
the numbers will be very low.
Um, we don't have, um, a lot
of infringement offenses in order to be able
to issue infringement notices.
Um, they are for very sort
of straightforward matters of fact.
But we can get you the numbers on
Infringement. And also,
if you wouldn't mind giving us the infringement
notices and sort of the bracket of how big the fine were.
Yes. Um, that would be helpful.
Yes. Oh, there, there's a fee that's attached. So
Fee's the number. Great.
Um, and the other question I have is, you know, would
that fee fine infringement notice regardless
of the size mm-hmm.
Then considered as part of the revenue for No.
Oh, I don't, so that goes into the A crown.
The crown, crown, crown, okay. Last question in this
Part from Jan.
So, so the three functions, the engage in force permit,
permit permit, um, uh, one
of the concerns that has come through,
and we did that in our briefing here, has been the, um,
collaboration and coordination across the
health and safety system.
And I just can't pick a sense of that in the, um,
in the annual report, uh, with those three areas,
those three functions.
So there seems to have been a bit
of a pulling away from that.
I might be reading that wrong,
but I know, um, a lack of using the likes of the groups
of the established Kat group group.
Uh, I guess what I'm asking is the international obligations
under, um,
ILO one 50 fives talk about it working in a karate way.
So what will that look like going forward in this new
way of working?
Okay, I'll make a start. You can try ILO. How's that?
Yeah. Um, so, uh, from a health
and safety system perspective, so we engage broadly
with all the other industries.
We meet regularly as a health
and safety, uh, regulator cohort.
So that happens on a monthly basis at the moment, especially
with some of the health and safety changes
that are found a consideration, uh, to kahu mata.
We actually, uh, surveyed our members at the beginning
of the year, and the feedback from the members was that
that particular setup wasn't working for them.
Um, but there was different voices around the table,
and they felt that, um, they would prefer to have their own,
um, engagement
and to be working with us on something
that was really practical.
So our guidance advisory group is, is a way
that we are doing that, but we certainly are still engaging
on a tripartite basis,
but we are just not using that particular forum.
Yeah. So at, at this point
that those formal mechanisms aren't, aren't, um,
fully functional, but it is absolutely a plan to kind
of really step into, uh,
getting a better handle on our strategic kind
of relationships and engagements in, in the way forward.
And it does all fit under that engaged function.
It's definitely, um, seen as part of that.
So the formal mechanisms aren't quite working
or formed yet, I should say.
Is is I think what you said, is that a work in progress
or is that something that's been put
to the side at this stage?
I would say it's a work in progress.
It's a work in progress.
So strategic partnering plan is under development now,
but we do still continue to meet individual
with individual organizations on a regular basis.
So that's something that I would like to sort
of look at over time, because that is something
that I've been hugely concerned about, is that work?
Because I feel like it's very fragmented.
So, um, I've just sort of giving a heads up there that Yep.
Yeah, that's something I'll be
Asking about. I think that's, I
think that's fair.
So the engagement that we are doing is there, um,
it's regular, but in a joined up
way, that could be stronger. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, we're gonna move to part four and opening the batting is
Lawrence. Thank you
chair. Um, in terms of platform, I'm gonna start
by focusing on serving undeserved communities.
And this is again, one of the questions we had, um,
for the minister and the chairs may be able to answer this
with the new, um, board structure.
And I know that the board is responsible,
we're setting the direction
and some of those, how would you be able
to serve those under
unserved communities if those lived experience, et cetera,
on part of the board's makeup?
So to give an example, how then would the board, knowing
what they don't know and be able to,
and who they're gonna ask
for the information on what they don't know.
Mm-hmm. If that makes sense. Yeah.
Yeah. So I mean, for us it's through, um,
through our leadership.
Obviously our senior leadership has representation,
not necessarily executive, but at our tier three.
So we have, um, broad cultural
and, um, diverse industry representation across
our whole leadership team.
Cool. Just follow up that I'm gonna I on that. Yeah.
Um, sorry. Now please continue.
And I ask s after you finish. Okay. That's
Cool. Um, but we also engage
with, um, other organizations
to make sure that we are getting that information.
So, you know, we engage with Iwi, we engage
with Pacifica groups, we have our group, uh, we engage with,
uh, Chinese Association construction.
So we reach out into industry to make sure
that we are getting, you know, the, the vibe from that,
the workplaces back into our discussions and,
and into our interventions
Within that, I guess tier three management we're looking
at or some of the engagement.
Can I ask how many of those groups,
or are there anyone from, for example,
Tucker Tap in rainbow communities or disabled communities?
Uh, in our employee groups,
Both in terms of employee and reference groups?
I'd have to go, I'd have to come back to you on that one.
I dunno specifically. No,
Thank you. I
Think not, but I'll Find out. So we'll put
That as a follow up question Just to finish
that from a governance perspective, you know, the,
the board is not a representative bullet, it's a,
it's a governance board.
So we have fiduciary duty to govern and,
and to deliver on strategy, um,
whole management account on that.
Now. Um, I have been
really comfortable in my induction process over the last few
weeks in that the, um, the consultation processes
that management have with, with the, the, uh, workplace
covers off those areas that you, you're asking for,
you know, those minority
and this country is gonna evolve even further where the,
the change will continue and be more mindful.
So, um, engagement, listening
and understanding the requirements, um,
and you, your point about language barrier
and things earlier is, is a really good point that, um,
that's all listened to and,
and management have got a good structures in place that,
that, that pick up on that
and deliver it back through the board.
So, so whilst you, we, we may not have representative
of the groups you are asking about, we govern for everyone.
Uh, the, the WorkSafe is for here for everyone,
not just minorities.
No, just, I, I totally appreciate that.
It's really hardened to hear.
But I guess the question that I was seeking that a response
to is, it's good that the board
and the management has a awareness that these are some
of the issues, but sometimes you
don't know what you don't know.
Mm-hmm. How do you address situations
where you don't know what you don't know?
So for example, all of the questions I will ask is
because of my lived experience in these areas,
like rainbow communities, like disabled communities.
Yes. And if that's something that you don't know
that you should know Yes.
Then how are you're going to address that?
That's no good point. Well made.
Um, the other thing I'd say about the board too is, um,
four times a year in conjunction with our board meetings,
the board meets with different stakeholder groups.
Mm-hmm. So last year we met
with industry GR industry groups.
Um, this time we are meeting with health
and safety from some of the big businesses.
In June, we are meeting with, um, the NZTU
and unions, NZCG and unions.
So we do have different groups come in and,
and talk throughout the year, which is a chance
to engage directly with the board.
And we haven't quite settled the last
two for the remainder of the year.
Okay.
Primary. But Jan, and then we'll
Come back to, oh, thank you. And
I'll look, I was gonna start
with something else in this area,
but I'm going to keep on the underserved communities
because Lawrence is, uh, lead in there.
So, um, WorkSafe made great progress over a number of years
with, uh, the equity gap in forestry for Maori.
Uh, 'cause that's, there was a huge equity gap,
as you know, that was sitting there.
So you have now the mati hope, I'm saying
that Mati mati strategy,
and that appears to have been a successful strategy.
What is the future of that?
Um, MAI is being absorbed into, um,
our harm reduction action plan, as is our Pacifica one.
So what we will do is to have one
omnibus harm reduction action plan that we prepare with,
um, acc Yes, ma'am.
That will be more representative
of all different groups, to your point, Lawrence.
So there'll be different, uh, lenses on the harm reduction
that we want to achieve, and that'll be documented in there.
So rather than having a different strategy
for all different groups, we will have it in one.
How will you ensure then that you've got a strategy there
that that complies
with our treaty partnership principles as well?
Mm-hmm. Um, how will you ensure that that's not going to be
subsumed by all of the, just being part of the whole,
because you, you identified
the equity gap with Maori and the forestry,
and you put a strategy in place
and it was hugely successful.
Yes. How will, like that's what I thought the whole idea
of the mati strategy was, was to keep
that really good work going.
So how will you make sure that that doesn't get overtake?
And that's definitely still part
of our intervention design.
Yeah. And it has been, as part of our Forestry Road shows
that we mentioned, um, still working up in
with the charitable trust up there.
So, you know, when you look at our statistics,
when we look at the, um, the, the rates for Maori ha
still higher than the rest of the population.
Yeah. So that's still gonna be, you know, a need
that we have to do is to work with the industries
where Maori, um, represented
and to make sure that, um,
the work we do in those industries bring
down the rates, those needs.
And, you know, we tailor the, the, the contact that we have
with different communities based on what
that audience needs from us.
And we'll continue to do that. So will
You have a really clo keep, continue
to have a close look at that desegregated data to ensure
that those, there's a close lens
that's being applied to that?
Yes. Yeah. We, we, that will continue
to be reported is being reported.
Okay. Thank you. Um, Vanessa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so can I just ask about, um,
sort of the organizational health, if you like mm-hmm.
You mentioned that there's a lot, uh, that you've had two
restructuring processes over the last while,
so I just acknowledge that's quite a lot Yeah.
To go through. And at the end of that, um, how, um,
how are your people fearing?
Mm-hmm. Are they, um, is there good morale?
Is there a good culture within the organization?
And, um, what, so reflecting on that, some of the
measurables for that in terms of attrition rates, turnover,
burnout, that sort of thing,
what comments do you have about that?
Yeah, that, that's a great question.
And look, it's very dear to my heart.
So, um, I, first I just wanna say
how amazing our people have been through the past year
that I've been, uh, part of WorkSafe
because they have been through a lot.
We, um, went through restructure.
We stood up a new organization,
we have some new people in leadership, including me,
and they have been amazing.
And during all of that time, we sort of had, you know, most
of our performance measures as well.
So hats off to them, um, from an engagement perspective,
our engagement measures, we stopped surveying
during the restructure period.
We started again as soon
as we stood up the new organization in May.
And since that time, we've been surveying quarterly
and our, uh, engagement rate has gone up
by 9% in the last six months.
So we've still got room to go.
But, you know, that's, and that's a collaborative effort.
That's everybody in WorkSafe playing their part,
being great leaders, being, you know, great part
of the team stepping into the change.
So, um, as I mentioned, we've still got a way to go,
but I'm really heartened by the direction of travel.
Um, so, um, what's
Your turnover? Sorry?
Turnover 10%. Um, it's lower.
Um, we don't take that for granted
because the market is a bit tighter at the moment.
So that's definitely something we'll continue to watch.
But a lot of the work we're doing with our inspectorate
as we bring people on board.
One of the things we've started doing is when we bring on
board new inspectors, now they do a ride along
before they sign on the line.
Mm-hmm. And, uh, that's been fantastic
because they actually know what they're getting into.
And we did have some feedback
before when people were saying, well,
I didn't think it would be like this.
So this is one way that we've made sure
that our attention is more robust.
Right. We've invested heavily in leadership
too. Thank you. While I can.
Very good. Change. So, so, yeah.
So, um, on that, that wouldn't be the only issue.
How receptive, like, um, how quick can you be, um,
acting on the issues
that employees will bring up within the organization?
And any examples other than that that you've got?
Yeah, I mean, I'll, I'll talk about, you know,
elts role in this, if you like.
So we, uh, every team
above a certain size gets their own feedback directly.
So if it's a small sample size, it's anonymized.
So as a leader, you know what the team's thinking,
and each team sets its own plans, which we
save down separately.
And then we can look at those
and say, right, what is each team calling out for?
What do we need to do more of?
But from an EOT perspective, um, we got asked to,
to be more vis visible and be on the ground more.
So we are, so we, um, we visited site every month, each
of us, we've covered the country.
We'll do that again next year
and hold our executive team meetings around.
We go out on site visits with people,
put on our boots and get out there.
So really, it's, it's getting close to the business
and understanding some of those challenges directly.
And we have who every, uh, month.
And so we will talk very, you know, obviously they're about
what we've heard and what we're doing as, as a result.
Right. Um, I'm gonna move to a, a new primary.
Um, what impacts does WorkSafe, uh, expect
that AI will have on your operations?
It's fine. Great minds.
Pardon?
Okay. A common question. Yeah.
Uh, look, uh, very on our mind too,
and we've already started some proof of concepts with ai.
So first of all, we've put 40 of our senior leaders
through a strategic AI workshop, uh, just to understand the,
the possibility, because I think to,
to really embed it in an organization, the leaders need
to understand it from a strategic perspective, some
of the areas that we're using it at the moment, uh, uh,
in guidance and in our data and digital.
So just to give you an idea
and guidance, we are using AI to, um, have,
have a look in the world and see
what a reliable first draft might be.
Where's our literature review coming from?
Where's our expertise?
Uh, we are then using it as we go into consultation to
gather all the consultation
and draw a thread through what we started
to, what we end up with.
And AI can do that.
We've mapped it through a process that we did without AI
and saved just a month in consultation just by doing that.
And then thirdly, AI will help us in the way we serve up
that information to people who want to use it.
So at the moment, if you ask about the forestry aop,
you might get a 200 page document.
AI will help somebody say, I only wanna look at
that much, gimme a bit more.
Do you wanna look at the whole document?
So it has a way of serving it up as you know,
and bite sized pieces that are easier to tailor and consume.
So those are just three live ones we have at the moment,
along with some of our data stuff as well.
Mm-hmm.
So the data stuff would be about
how you're collecting data from industry
and extract you how're understanding what's going on.
Yeah, yeah, exactly. Like even the point about who's
not engaging Exactly.
And, and being able to kind of, you know, really, um,
map, um, yeah.
Business profiles and knowing, you know, what, what,
where to send our people.
Um, but also how to extract meaning from, um, you know,
if you think about an investigation report
that might be quite a sort of lengthy document
that is just about a very specific,
but we could kind of do some meta-analysis there.
There are so many possibilities that we are just working
Through all of this. In the last
three months, we rolled out, um, AI co-pilot
to all of our organizations.
So everybody in our organization has access to it.
And as you know, it's got administrative
value all over the place.
Yeah. Which is a first step in the AI journey.
Um, why was the, uh, the, the work that was resumed,
um, around AI activity
or the activities that were resumed needing
to be paused, um, during the period?
So as I understand it,
Is that in the report somewhere
You started, um, or,
or you resumed your activity around the implementation of ai
and then you paused while,
No, I don't recall that. Sorry.
It in the report. Um, so you initiated the first stage
of work, um, to pilot artificial intelligence
to augment the guidance development process.
Yep. And then was that paused at a point,
or did that just continue?
No, it just continued. Yeah.
So we had a proof of concept. Yeah.
Okay. So there was no pause or stop in that
Process? No. Okay.
Okay. Cool. Um, Lawrence question.
Thank you, uh, chair, I, this is, this is kind of related
to progress in high risk industries,
and I know we tend to talk about physical risk,
but I want to more, more focus on mental health mm-hmm.
Because I did a search
and there's very little
that I could see in your annual report
talking about mental health.
Mm-hmm. And we know that mental health continues to be,
and particularly, um, suicide, et cetera.
Mm-hmm. Um, continues to be a really prominent concern
with an agriculture,
farming, construction, and then all of those.
Mm-hmm. What work are you
doing in that space?
Being my first question? I do have a couple of follow up.
Yeah. So, uh, when WorkSafe went through its, uh,
strategic reset last year, uh,
there were some tough choices made about
what we invested and where.
So you should be aware,
we focused on the four key industries.
That's not to say that we don't engage
with psychosocial harm.
We have, uh, recently done a, a survey, sorry, some research
and also in conjunction with industry,
produced some guidance earlier this year.
Um, but there are other, so I step back
where there's a systemic issue within a business,
we will still step into that.
And, you know, we have quite publicly,
you've seen it in the media probably in the last four
months, but we are not in a position
to get involved in every piece of psychosocial harm,
like bullying, et cetera.
So there are other agencies
or other acts like, um, foreign relations, human rights, um,
bill rights and other agencies better placed to do that.
I, I understand, and I'll pick up on some
of the things more about in terms of burnouts
and harassment and et cetera.
Yeah. But I want to focus specifically, you know,
when we're looking at the agriculture sector when it comes
to mental health and some of the systemic triggers
that leads to that.
Yes. Both from stress, from isolation, all of those.
Are you saying that you're no longer in a position
to address or some of those key issues?
I think it's, it's more about the, um,
the role is really about providing information.
We've got some really great guidance, uh,
about psychosocial risk management for businesses
because those key elements of, of isolation and, uh,
and stress brought on by economic kind
of changes is something that the businesses are going
to be front and center thinking about.
Okay. And so we are providing guidance for people to help,
you know, think about management strategies as opposed to,
you know, to the extent that we are able to
deploy people to, to go and visit.
I mean, there's, there's a limit to what we're able to do,
but certainly at the information level we can.
That's true. Do you do any coordination roles within sort
of, I guess, peak bodies?
So, you know, when we look at mates in construction,
that wasn't, that was a collaboration,
but that was also something that that sector together sort
of developed something.
Do you work with the peak bodies within,
like Fed farmers or anything?
Safer pharmacists stepping into the space.
Okay. Sorry. Safer. Safer farms. Safer farms. Okay.
One final question on that.
Um, do you see an increased reporting
of things like, uh, I guess work related stress,
like burnout in particular within sectors?
Has it increased in the last financial year?
I think, um, I mean there's no, uh, statutory obligation
to, to report any of those things,
but we do hear from people who've got concerns.
Um, uh, and yes, I would say that there probably has been,
but it's, it's, it's really for me more about a, um,
a raised awareness, which is a good thing
that people are more prepared to sort of talk about it and,
and to, to let people know.
So as opposed to, you know, you, you've got no way
of knowing whether it's an increased incident
or just an increased awareness.
And so they're, they're talking about
It, but these other data that you're tracking,
We have, we have data that we use.
We, we have data when we get notified.
When we get notified, but there's no obligation
to notify WorkSafe. Would
You be able to provide us noting that it's Yeah. Social.
Yep. We'll put that down as a Yep, that's right.
Thank you Jan. Yeah,
Just a quick one.
Um, around on page 37,
you talked about the pay gap action plan.
Uh, and I noticed that it's been reducing, which is great,
but it's still above the, um, public service average.
And I'm, you've talked there about increasing women in
leadership roles in, uh, tiers one to three Mm.
But is there a gender imbalance in the organization overall?
Is that why it's that bit higher?
There are in a couple of, um, categories
and, um, off the top of my head, I think that's probably
around our more senior inspectors.
Right. Where there are more men than women. Mm-hmm.
So I think that the point here that, um, is
that we people within, in the same band there,
there isn't a difference in what they get paid.
Yeah. Men and women. But there is a different representation
in some bands where there are more men than women.
Do you think that your change in your, and,
and I'm paraphrasing here,
your employment strategy like ridealongs
and things like that changes the diversity
of way around that and
Absolutely. So you
are seeing that change? Yes,
We are. And, and
actively, yeah.
Okay. That's great. Thank you very much.
Well, I think we'll come
to some concluding remarks. No, no.
Oh, we still got more. Sorry. Oh,
You had no more on my lineup.
We're not onto to talk to the,
I do have another question. Part
five, Current events
All about the Structured agenda.
Ed wasn't going there. Okay. I just had nothing else on my,
I am fitting my hand up
sheet. I have more questions. Okay.
You still on part? We'll go to general. It worked
Spot one for part five.
Okay. We're on part five now.
Yeah. So, um, I keep this and
because it is a current issue, the fire doors
and the, that I wanted to talk about, um, it's an issue
that needs a proportionate regulatory response, um, to each
relevant PCBU.
Yeah. Um, but importantly does need
that big picture look as well.
So what advice is WorkSafe giving
around regulatory settings in this area?
Because it, there is more coming every day
that we are seeing around this,
and it is of huge concern,
even though it's not right there in the headlines.
Yeah. It's still massive. Yeah.
So I was wondering what your focus has been
around the advice that you've
Been given. Absolutely.
So we are, we are part
of a joined up cross government team, as you'll be aware.
Yeah. Uh, working on this.
And our role is to, uh, support businesses with advice.
So in the first instance is what we've been doing is, uh,
answering their questions, visiting businesses
to make sure they understand the risk that
that's taken off the shelves.
We've done over, I think about 250 visits now to businesses
that are either selling it or using it like libraries.
And, um, ours is very much of education. Yeah.
You know, if you've got it, what do you do with it now?
Um, it is regulated.
So, you know, we've, um, there's, there's not a lot
of wiggle room in, in how we do address it
because it's dangerous and,
and that's the right thing to do.
But, um, you know, we are where we can assist
with practical ways to approach that. We absolutely have
Does there have to be, um,
or some look at the change
of what's coming in through the border.
I mean, uh, I heard the minister at the time saying, well,
you can't look at everything that's coming in,
but sand is high risk.
It could be high risk because it's with,
and when, when people, our labs are doing those, um,
investigations, they're finding huge amounts
of asbestos with that.
So is there something that's not happening there
with the regulations because
that's ultimately not keeping people safe at work?
That's, but beyond our scope.
So that's probably a question or customs. Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Cool.
Alright. Actually, I want to follow up on the,
as asbestos, I want to check with your work safe role
within the current issue of asbestos in place
and in ECE and schools.
Yeah. Would you be able to elaborate?
Yeah, sure. Sure. Yeah.
So, um, ministry of Education, obviously part
of the response group as our Ministry of Health.
Yeah. So Ministry of Education have some quite deep,
you know, um, expertise within their organization.
So they've developed their, um, their own guidance,
which we have supported and, you know, reviewed with them.
But, uh, they're reviewing,
they're handling their own school response
because they wanted to understand how many schools impacted
how's the impact on school operations.
So they've been running the administration of that part
of the process themselves.
But the, the cross agency group is still meeting every day.
So we have a good understanding of, you know, size
of the impact, new products, et cetera.
So in terms of the guidelines
that the MOE provided mm-hmm.
And the step by step guide on the website, that is something
that WorkSafe is also involved in and contribute
and saying yes, that is the correct process.
Absolutely. And schools should be, if it gets
as stage, should follow those process.
It's a very joined up process.
Absolutely. Okay. Yeah. That's really,
really good to know.
Yeah. Um, I do you have
No, no, no. That was
my one current event
Though. Yeah, that was
my, that was my main
question as well. Okay. Yeah.
Concluding remarks.
Uh, really just to, to thank
the committee for the time today.
I mean, as I mentioned earlier, I'm immensely proud
of our team and the work that we've done this year.
Uh, we've stood up a, a really robust strategic program.
We've city the ship, we've delivered our performance
measures and um, you know,
it's a really purposeful organization
and the reason we come to work every day is to make sure
that people can both go to work and come home safely.
So thank you for the opportunity to share today.
Thanks Murray. Thanks Sharon.
Thanks team, uh, for joining us this morning.
Thanks for the work you're doing across New Zealand.
We really appreciate it. Thanks.
Look forward to seeing you again soon. Thank you,
You so much. Thank you so much, Lauren.